 

 The Bosnian War of the early 1990s is one of the most poorly understood events of recent history. Many educated American liberals couldn't even tell you that it took place between 1992 and 1995, or that it had nothing to do with the Clinton Administration's decision to attack Belgrade in 1999. I can understand why. At some point in the 1990s many people in the west decided that Bosnian Serbs were Nazis and Bosnian Muslims were their Jewish victims. Even in the United States, ironically one of the most Islamphobic countries on earth, any attempt to discuss the brutal civil war that ultimately led to the breakup of the former Yugoslavia with an even hand is to risk accusations of "white supremacist" or "genocide denier." Srđan Dragojević's Lepa sela lepo gore, roughly translated as "pretty village pretty flame", therefore, which sees the Bosnian War from the Serbian point of view, has not been given the attention it deserves. In my opinion it ranks right up there with Clint Eastwood's The Outlaw Josey Wales, and just below Sergio Leone's The Good the Bad and the Ugly, both of which dramatize the western theater of the United States Civil War, which resembles the Bosnian War a lot more than most people might imagine.

 Until recently, Americans thought of the United States Civil War as being a tragic conflict of "brother against brother". That's patently false. It was about slavery. The Bosnian War, on the other hand, at least as it is presented in Lepa sela lepo gore, was indeed about brother vs. brother, or to be more specific, about the failure of brotherhood, the "brotherhood and unity" of Tito's Yugoslavia, a socialist federation that united Orthodox Christians, Muslims, and Roman Catholics under one secular government. Lepa sela lepo gore opens in 1971 at the apt named Tunnel of Brotherhood and Unity near the Bosnian city of Goražde. But nothing goes as planned. At the ribbon cutting ceremony a communist party official accidentally slices through his own thumb, spraying the girl holding the ribbon with blood, and providing an ominious glimpse of the future. Only ten years later the tunnel has already fallen into such disrepair and decay that Milan and Halil, two young boys, one an Orthodox Christian Serb, the other a Bosniak Muslim, staring at the entrance, but fearing to enter because they believe that a Drekavac, an ogre from South Slavic mythology, is sleeping inside, and will destroy the entire village if woken up. The symbolism is clear. The Drekavac represents not only the coming civil war, but the brotherhood of Milan and Halil, one of whom may have been brought up to worship Jesus, the other to bow to Mecca 5 times a day, but both South Slavs who share a common pre-Christian mythology. 

 According to the Bible, the first violent act was between brothers. For most westerners, the Serbs are Cain, and the Bosnian Muslims the innocent Abel. The Serbs, therefore, are the outcasts of Europe and Serbia the only European country that's been bombed since the Second World War. Serbian generals and government officials get prosecuted for war crimes in a way that American, British and French government officials, many of whom are guilty of crimes far than Slobodan Milosovic or Ratko Mladić, don't. In the Book of Genesis, Cain kills Abel because God accepts Abel's offering but not his. For Milan and Halil, the hatred comes gradually, ominously, like a slight chill in the air that indicates a coming storm. The problem isn't so much that God favors one brother over the other, but that God is dead, and his children have never quite learned how to get along with him. If at age 10 Milan and Halil looked so much alike you couldn't tell them apart, we begin to notice differences in their appearence, not subtle but big differences. Milan, played by Dragan Bjelogrlić who looks a bit like a young Russell Crow, is square jawed and masculin. Halil, played by Nikola Pejaković who almost reminds me of a blond, blue-eyed John Belushi, is round-faced, soft, feminine and pleasure loving but with a terrifying undercurrent of violence just beneath the surface. The fault line between the masculine west and the orientalized east has opened up right under their feet. The Drekavac is loose. The village will be destroyed. 

 As if to mirror the chaotic society that Yugoslavia has become, Srđan Dragojević fractures the movie's timeline. We find ourselves in the future, with a gravely wounded Milan in a military hospital in Belgrade, in the past, following the events that led up to the murderous rage the former friends now feel for each other, and the present, a desperate fight between a small detachment of the Yugoslavian Army, made up entirely of Serbs, and a much larger group of Muslims, a fight that begins in the village and ends up in the place we always knew the movie would end up, in the Tunnel of Brotherhood and Unity, now the hiding place of Cain from Abel, or perhaps Abel from Cain, the former home of the Drekavac now rampaging through the Bosnian countryside. 